---
slug: docusaurus-plugins
title: How to create a custom plugin for Docusaurus
author: Nick Silva
author_title: College Rising Junior
author_url: https://github.com/silva-nick
author_image_url: https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/39960606?v=4
tags: [blog, how to, swe, under construction]
---

## Introduction

One of Docusaurus's best features is its growing library of open-source plugins and themes. Before starting your plugin, check out the [officially supported](https://docusaurus.io/docs/next/api/plugins) and [community maintained](https://docusaurus.io/community/resources#community-plugins) plugins already available. Although there are already a lot of plugins on the market, there are still many that haven't been written. This guide should help take you along the path of development.

#### Some general vocabulary to get started:

- Plugin: external code that implements Docusaurus's lifecycle APIs. _Plugins_ are generally server-side and can be used to fetch data, generate routes and pages, or load external code into your project.One singular plugin could implement the lifecycle api and have both server-side and frontend components.
- Theme: a term used to differentiate frontend specific plugins. These often contain React components and must furfill the _theme_ lifecycle api.
- Preset: a plugin that helps combine and configure different presets of plugins and themes.
- Init: general term used to describe cli-based Docusaurus initialization packages.

<!--truncate-->

### General overview of Docusaurus

#### Docusaurus from a user's perspective

#### Anatomy of a plugin

### Managing multi-package projects

#### Using Lerna

Lerna is a super useful npm package manager that fits perfectly with a

#### Multi-package TypeScript

### Docusaurus dependencies

### Other general recommendations

## Creating a data-driven plugin

### Plugin lifecycle api

## Adding custom components through a theme

### Theme lifecycle api

## Initialization

###
